Kind of how you grew up and what might have influenced you to write science
fiction or to write in general and why science fiction in particular? Well, I
started reading this stuff when I was six years old. Like, you know, most people
start sometime before they're 12. I started when I was six. Actually, the first
book I read that's really amazing was Chad Oliver's Mists of Dawn in the old
Winston edition, you know? And I'll never forget that book. And it's real
wonderful. Now I'm a friend of Chad. you know here 30 years later and stuff like
never never thought but i grew up reading the stuff when i was a kid and uh then
in the early 60s i got into through buddy saunders uh i got into uh comic book
fandom which was just starting up like in but it was like one of the four people
in the world who have copies of rockets blast comic collector from number one
which was put out on carbon paper to the four people who subscribe to it or
something but buddy got me into comic book fandom originally as an artist uh
originally did art i did like covers for fanzines and uh you know helped buddy
and yard like inked his artwork and stuff like that and started writing since
i'd been reading science fiction all along i wrote essentially what is george
martin and everybody referred to back then as text stories which were the
printed stories like you would see in the fanzines and stuff of the time printed
stories of like about the comic book characters, except they were written
instead of, you know, in panel form, they were written out. And from there it
was just like by the mid-'60s I was writing SF stories and submitting them and
getting them back and, you know, doing that until I finally sold in 1969.
Oh, I'm sorry. No, go ahead. The science fiction aspect, and why not westerns or
fantasy or romances or something why was it science fiction well because i'd i'd
grown up reading it you know and i'd gotten away from reading it's amazing uh
i'd gotten away from reading while i was writing the stories as i went away from
reading science fiction there's a period about three years there where mostly
while i was reading i was in college and i was in theater and journalism thing
like that i was reading plays and movie scripts and uh novels and things like
that instead of you know regular novels instead of sf and but I was still
writing the sf because I mean it was there since I was six years old you know
and and it just it just stays with you and that's that's essentially what well
actually if you want to know it everybody has a story like this but I read lynn
carter's wizards of lemuria and I said if he can get that published I can write
I can get that I can get my stuff published. It's real obvious. Everybody, I
think, has a story about that. They read something after they've been reading
this stuff for 20 years. They finally read something that just pushes their
buttons and says, that's garbage. I can write better than that. Even when you're
18 years old, you say, I can write better than that. You set out to prove it. A
lot of people set out to prove it. Write a story and submit it or don't submit
it. Just write the story to prove it. They can write a story. I'd already been
writing a story. essentially is I got serious about submitting it and things
like that, you know, and did. That's why I accepted. I like to ask this question
of people that are roughly my age, I'm 34, and the Sputnik and that fallout had
a lot of effect on me and what I did and what I became and all that. Did that
have any influence on you because science was really something back in the 50s
and they really pushed it? Well, the only surprise was, I mean, if you're
talking about the effect, like Stephen King talks about in Dance Macabre. He was
watching Earth vs. Flying Saucers, and the theater manager came out and said the
Russians have put up a satellite, and the theater goes, oh, you know, and
everybody was stunned. I wasn't stunned at all. I mean, Phillip Ozee Farmer
always says, I got turned off in science fiction when we weren't on the moon by
1949. You know, he says, I haven't respected science since then because he grew
up as a kid in the 30s, you know, always expecting us to be on the moon by 1949.
But, I mean, I had, you know, I was in the 50s. I was a space freak and, you
know, a jet plane freak, you know, and call it model airplanes and model
spaceships and things like that. The only surprise was that the Russians
actually did it first because we had said we were going ahead and doing it in
1956 and getting serious about it. It was just that they had gotten a little
serious a little faster, you know, and then we spent the next three years trying
to essentially catch up and top them. But, I mean, it was no surprise to me. It
was good because I thought I would be one of the first people on Mars,
essentially. You know, you think when, like, when Sputnik goes up and you're,
you know, you're 13 years old, you know, you say, well, good, then there'll be
an astronaut training. I mean, there'll be a spaceman training program, and I'll
get into spaceman training, and we'll be on Mars by 1970, you know, and stuff
like that. But that was the good aspect of it. And then, like, if you read Tom
Wolfe's The Right Stuff, talking about, you know, these guys that flew these,
you know, everybody thought that we would, you know, have the three-step rocket
and the space station, the whole bit. Everybody that flew the experimental
rocket planes and jets thought the guys going to the astronaut program were
nuts, you know, because they said, what, get in a can and ride it up and go
around and come back down and don't fly it or anything, you know? I mean, they
thought that was just garbage, you know, and nobody knew that's the way it was
going to be. You know, they had the dinosaur project and all that, which is
really, you know, essentially like the shuttle is now, you know. and we thought
it would be like that, you would fly the thing up and you would fly it back in
and you would land it, you know, and things like that and use it over and over
and stuff. But I assumed that I would be one of the, you know, like when you're
a kid that hot about stuff you assume you'll be one of the first people on Mars
or, you know, stuff like that, you know. That's what it did. I mean, it just
made me, you know, say, well, good, it's going to happen, you know. Okay.
Lunchbox, as I understand, was your first published story. How many had you
written? How easy was it, or difficult was it, to break in, finally to publish?
Well, essentially, I had been trying to get published since 1966. Been serious
about it, 65 and 66. And I'd been publishing in fanzines all along, stories in
fanzines. And I just kept sending the stories out until finally one of them
sold. I mean, there was no problem breaking in as such. I mean it wasn't like a
conscious thing saying this is the one I'm gonna break in with or I'm gonna
write a story to break in it was just I've been sending them out and getting
them back until one day I sent one out and it didn't come back you know check
came back that's you know it was like I've been writing for fanzines all along
and comic scripts and things like that and the this story just came I mean when
it was time for it to sell it sold you know okay um was lunchbox by the way did
that precede the uh the viking lander was in fact uh it was i sold that story in
1969 or not in 69 in 70 and i sold it four days or i got the letter four days
after i was drafted in the army and but because john kemmel it was sold analog
because john camel died in the meantime and everything was in an uproar at
street and smith for for about their conductor and asked for six months or so uh
ben boba wrote me a letter in 1972 and said i'm changing all originally it was
called voyager if you remember the Viking uh the Viking stuff was all called
voyager and it's the whole story was talking about the voyager lender and all
this kind of stuff and ben boba wrote and says it's okay if i change change
voyager to viking so you won't look like a jerk. And I said, why sure, Ben, you
know, anything you want. And, you know, because the technology, they changed the
term, you know, the terminology in the meantime. And, you know, I'd been in the
army. What was that? You know, I was guarding PX's and stuff, you know, and I
hadn't been kept up on the change in terminology in the meantime, you know. But,
yes, it was, it preceded, there were several prototype models of the,
essentially what became the Viking Lander all competing for for the contract in
the late 60s and the voyager thing was one of them and and i've got a i've got a
picture i visited langley for one of the mock-ups of the of the original voyager
thing which was slightly it looked much the same as the viking eventually was
but had you know longer arm and all this kind of stuff you know but uh anyway
yeah it's it preceded the program. So that's why, you know, the change to Viking
was, you know, like, fitted into the story, you know. A story of yours that
affected me maybe surprisingly much when I read everything was Mono-No-Aware
?Nono-No-Aware? Mono-No-Aware, I believe is the way the Japanese pronounce it. I
figured it's hard for Texans to pronounce Japanese. That one uh where it's
talking about except the past is inevitable that sort of thing that one how did
how did you how did that hit you what today well that story was one of the
easiest stories i ever wrote in my life it's amazing it like it like came to me
one afternoon and i had it finished by like eight o'clock at night and um sent
it off and sold it you know i sent it off to a couple three four places first
which rejected of course but it was finally published in Haunt of Horror the
shortly of Marvel science fiction magazine or horror magazine but no I was just
doing I was reading the Hiroshima you know about Hiroshima I'd always been
interested in you know the atomic the atomic bomb in the fact of the atomic bomb
we grew up with it you know and stuff like that And to a lot of people, they
sort of forgot for a while what it was all about and everything. And I think
that Japan is the only nation in the world that has experienced an atomic war. I
mean, it's, you know, that's it. They're the only ones. And I was reading all
this research and there are several books like The Flowers of Hiroshima and
things like that which have been written about the survivors and about things
like that. Ed Bryant did a story later called The Hippocushi Gallery, or at
about the same time, in fact, although it wasn't published much later. But there
was a fascination with the fact of the bomb and Mono no en Wari, I was reading
about Mono no en Wari, the feeling,
it's sort of almost indescribable. They usually describe it as the sadness of
the beauty of the world, You know, it's like the translation of it about the
transience of things and stuff like that. And it's a Japanese, and it's not a
Zen term, but it's sort of an alien term to Westerners and stuff. And Donald
Ritchie wrote a series of articles on that feeling in Japanese films, which I
just read at the time. And those influences, it all just came together. You
know, the whole thing about trying to stop the Enola Gay from dropping the bomb,
you know, and like the futility of changing it, you know, and because it
happened. I mean, even though the guy does change things, he doesn't change
that. He doesn't change the fact. And it really it came to me, like I said, it
came to me all at once, and I wrote it and tried to get that feeling into the
story, the feeling that the Japanese were talking about in the story. and I
don't know if I did it, but it worked for me. It worked for me when I wrote the
story. I thought it was very effective. Okay, I want to move on. A lot of the
stuff you did in the 70s was a collaborative effort with Stephen Utley, with
Buddy Saunders, and one with George Martin.
How do you collaborate and why did you choose this as a way of writing? Well, it
shows us. What happened was that the Turkey City Writers, which had come to be
referred as because of Turkey City Writers Workshops, there was a group of us.
And we all, it's amazing that it happened. We were all from Texas, living in
Texas. And we all published our first story within like six or eight months of
each other. It was amazing. It just happened that way. And we all got to meet
each other at conventions within like six months of our first stories being
published. and we were all writing at the same time. We were all serious about
this stuff we were going to take over, and one of the ways we did it was we
started collaborating with each other. We'd do stories on our own, but then we'd
also do stories that we couldn't do on our own with the other people. It wasn't
a conscious effort on anybody's part. It was just one of those things that just
happened. Like the Futurians all living in the same apartment, that just
happened. I mean, all this kind of stuff. It just happened in it. We wrote for a
period of about the thing about the collaboration with Steve is although they've
been appearing up until two years ago, nearly all of them were written between
1972 and 1975. Like, I haven't done but about two collaborations since 1975.
It's just that the publishing schedules, you know, are delayed and they, like,
come out later and stuff like that. And people think that they were just done
six months ago, but they weren't. but most of our collaborations of all those
people were over by about 75 or 76. And it's just one of those things that
happened. We were just all writing at the same time. We were all right there.
Like Buddy was my landlord. He owned one half of Duplex and I was in the other.
And, of course, he got me into comics fandom 10 years before that anyway. And
some of us were friends. Some of us met each other and became friends and things
like that. and it's just that we just we just sparked each other you know if you
if you had something you were doing and you got through with it and you weren't
quite ready to do something else you could always you know do a collaboration
with buddy or with or with proctor or with you know you know anything like that
and like we just there must have been in space about two years there must have
been 35 or 40 stories come out of the various collaborations, you know, two and
sometimes three-way collaborations with people, you know. It was amazing. It's
amazing that it happened and it's amazing that we got so much done on our own,
too, besides doing all that, you know. Okay, A Voice, And Bitter Weeping, which
was done with Buddy, then got turned into or converted to the Texas-Israeli War,
which is the only novel so far, the only science fiction novel that you have
your name affixed to. Yeah. How did it evolve into the novel? When you wrote the
short story, did you have the novel in mind, or did it just... This is another
stroke of strange luck. We originally wrote that story before I sold Lunchbox,
even. Buddy and I did this 10,000-word novella or novelette in alternate
chapters, as in the novel, as in the first 50 pages of novel. We tried to sell
that thing everywhere, and it would not sell. You know, it got up to the point
where the battleship, the battle with the battleship or the cruiser in Dallas,
that was where the thing ended. And it wouldn't sell anywhere. And I went in the
Army. Buddy quit trying to market it while I was in the Army. When I came out of
the Army and I started selling stories and all this stuff and everybody started
selling stories, Buddy started writing again. And he also took, Voice in a
Bitter Weeping, took all my parts out of it. In other words, half the story just
by leaving the parts he'd written in. And sold it first thing off to Galaxy. And
okay, and then he sold it to Galaxy. Judy Lindell Ray was the assistant editor
at Galaxy. And had just been hired by Ballantyne Books as her SF editor. The
last thing she saw before she left Galaxy was our story. And she liked it and
she wrote this and she said, I liked this story a lot. do you think you could
come up with an outline for a novel? And if you do, I'll offer you so much and
so much. And we went, oh, wow, you know. So we said, not only do we have an
outline, we sit down and, like, continued the outline as the book goes, like in
one night. So we said, not only do we have an outline, but the first 10,000
words are already written, you know. And just like that, we just stuck my parts
back in, the alternate chapters back in. We had 10,000 words of the book
already, and all we had to do was write another 45,000 words, you know. and uh
they wrote back you know they accepted the outline gave us a contract and that
was you know we wrote the book that was it was a stroke of luck it was just a
stroke of luck we were it was at the right place at the right time you know two
weeks before two weeks later it wouldn't have that wouldn't have happened
probably you know that's gone to what's third printing third printing it's third
printing now i figured out there about 90,000 copies in print and all somewhere
you know And we have, there's an Italian, a Spanish, and a French edition. Is
there an Israeli edition? No, there's not. They sold, what they do is they sold
the English edition in Israel, you know, as an export thing. And, you know, it
occasionally shows up on the royalty statement, you know, how many they sold in
Israel or whatever, overseas, you know. But it's doing, I guess Del Rey is going
to keep that thing in print. And forever, every four years, they reprint it and
jack the price up another 50 cents, you know. I guess they'll keep doing it
until 1999, when the book is all outdated. You have no objection to that? I have
no objection to that at all, you know. Okay, Custer's last jump. I call it an
alternate world story. I don't know. That was just for my own little catalog.
It's got an immense amount of detail in it. History, the Indians, the war and
all that. You must do a hell of a lot of research and reading and that sort of
thing to get that detail and flavor in the story. Well, with Custer, since it
was written with Stephen Utley, Utley had always been a Custer freak. He knew
all about all that stuff. I'd always been an airplane freak, so I knew all about
the airplane stuff. And we started one night in 1972, just like November of
1972, we started playing Can You Top This on the typewriter, you know? and so I
wrote a section about part of the second part the Collier article but about two
pages that and read it to me over the phone and about an hour later I rang him
back up and read the first five you know first three pages of the part of the
Smithsonian report about the about crazy horses airplane and we just went crazy
from there you know and like the story was written in like six days or something
like that. I did a tremendous amount of research in the time between the time we
started the story and the time we finished it. One of the things was it was
written in the alternate... I wrote the airplane part, Utley wrote the collier's
article, Steve wrote the Twain part because he'd always been fascinated by Mark
Twain and then I wrote the Testament of Black Man's Hand that Twain transcribes
in the story and then we both sat down and wrote the bibliography together. You
know, did all this stuff in the bibliography. And it came out, I think it took
about a week to write the story. But it was because we, both of us knew certain
parts, you know, already had done research in certain areas that we could write
the story and use the other research we did as we wrote it to finish it. But we
did research, but we already had a lot of research too. But still, you've done
from just what you've talked about so far you've done a whole lot of reading
about a whole lot of things Yeah this is like everybody says and I know it's
true I research too much I research everything too much every story I write I
research a whole bunch and then don't use half of it don't use a third of it I
like certain research that I want to do on my own when I'm not sure what I'm
doing So I read a whole lot about the whole subject and a lot of that works its
way back into the story. When I really when I know exactly what I'm doing a
story then I get real specific and that research is not as much fun you know
because you're saying I need to know exactly when or exactly what or something
like that you know that's nice because you got look. Whereas if you don't know
anything, not anything but you don't know much about the field you can just go
and get everything on it and just start going through it and reading it and
coming across fascinating little nuggets and stuff like that to use. I do too
much research. I do way too much research for every story. Sometimes the
research will take a month and writing a story will take two days. If it gives
it that flavor though, because that's a comment I made time and time again when
I was reading your stuff, was damn, the detail on this. It's incredible. If it
contributes to that, I don't think it's wasted. It's never wasted. And it's only
wasteful in the sense that I could possibly be doing the next thing down the
line while I'm still doing the research on one thing. You know, I could already
be through with the story and have it. But I do the research, and it just shows
up in the story.
Okay, in the same year, or at least they came out the same year, Mary Margaret
Road Grater. It had Indians. Is there any connection between Indians and the
story and Indians in the previous story? Did that kind of get you thinking about
Indians and that? Well, I'd always been fascinated with Indians.
And the Miramarga Road Guided was another one of those stories, like Mono New
Wari, there are about three I've done. They just came to me in a flash. I mean,
it was just, I'd done research on Indians for years. I had taken a course in
college in American Indian literature
and things like that, but the story itself just came in a flash one morning,
early one morning, you know? And I wrote it in a day, you know, the whole thing,
beginning to end. And I knew exactly how it came to me, the entire story. It's
really amazing. It's really a rare thing. And like writers usually have about in
their whole career, that happens about twice or three times, you know, and I've
used up two of mine. I know, I know, you know. It's really nice when it happens.
But just all the research I've done through the years just tumbled out, you
know, while I was writing the story. Yeah, that was the story that the change,
the element of change, I mean, here a woman comes along and joins. And it kind
of upsets the status quo. and then the bitterness involved, that just all came
out in one day. Yeah, it all came out in one day. It was essentially, I guess, a
lot of stuff had just been running around in my mind for months and months, and
what triggered it was I got up early one morning. I was visiting a friend in
Austin and I was sleeping on the couch, and I got up and I put on Bridge Over
Troubled Water by Simon and Garfunkel. Between the opening notes and the end of
the first verse, the whole story just went you know nothing wow you know this is
great and i guess it was i mean if you go back and you if you listen to bridge
over troubled water and you read the story there there's no common element at
all it's just something in the i guess in the feel or the mood of the song at
the time that just brought all that out you know it just brought it all
completely out i don't know where it came from i didn't ask i just i just said
out the typewriter start pounding away yeah yeah okay another story with that
lee blank as a bit from pole to pole that okay as a as an aside and this is a
compliment it's it read a lot like farmer to me i mean i just love farmer and to
me it was reminiscent of farmer but but damn it had a lot of detail? You did
your research on that? Well, Utley had wanted to write a novel when he was about
12 years old, I think he told me once, about Frankenstein's monster in
Pellucidar. You know, Burroughs Pellucidar. And he'd had that in the back of his
mind all his time. And he had told me about that, like, when we first met in
1972. And one day I was reading, I had a couple of books out, I forget what I
was researching. Who knows? I read Mary Shelley's Introduction to the Third
Edition of Frankenstein, and I read, I knew about John Cleave Sims' Letter to
the World, about the Hollow Earth, but what I read was Arthur Gordon Pym, with
the final line about the figure rose up in front of us, and the whiteness was
whiter than the hue of the snow, and this is in Antarctica, and I said, of
course, of course the Frankenstein monster disappears on the ice in the Arctic
in 1797 actually, in the chronology of Frankenstein, and he reappears to Pym,
you know, like 12 years later, you know, through the center of the earth, you
know, it was all there, You know, and I called up Steve and I said, we got it.
In fact, Steve was taking off for the 1974 Nebula thing. And I just wrote Robert
Silverberg, just written, because at one time for a few days, Robert Silverberg
had Custer's Last Jump. It should have appeared in New Dimensions rather than
Universe. But then he lost the contract on New Dimensions and moved it to
another publisher. And it would be too long. So he gave it back to Terry Carr,
who had in the meantime gotten another publisher for Universe. But he'd just
written and said, you know, I really wish you could write. Y'all guys could
write a story like Custer's Last Jump farming, you know. And I wrote him back a
letter and says, well, gee, all we've got is a story about what happened to
Frankenstein's monster from the time he disappeared in 1797 until he appeared to
Arthur Gordon Pym in 1828 or something, you know. And Steve was getting on the
plane that night. And I said, by the way, if Silverberg says he wants the story,
just say, okay, Bob. I just said, pretend like you know what you're talking
about. I said, I'll have the outline by the time you get back. And so Silverberg
says, I want the story. When Steve got there, and Steve came back and says, he
wants the story. What are we writing? And I said, here. And I handed him
essentially what would have been his idea since he was 12 years old or
something, but in an outlined form. And we, you know, wrote the thing up and
sent it off and Silverberg took it and it appeared in New Dimensions, you know?
But we did, we'd done a, I mean, I'd done research on Sims and the Frankenstein
monster and so would Steve and he'd done research on, you know, all this other
stuff and he, you know, hollow earth theories and all this, love craft. We put
everything in there. We put everything that possibly could be connected, you
know, with Antarctica, the Arctic or to hollow earth in there. And it does read
like Farmer because we were both reading a lot of Farmer at the time. That was
Farmer's golden age, like 74, 75, everything Gonzo he'd ever done was hitting
print at the same time. That's why it reads like Farmer, not like his style, but
his ideas and stuff. We just threw everything in. We just threw everything in
and stuff that didn't work, we just threw out. that must have been fun yeah it
was fun it was fun some stories are more fun than others you know this one was
more fun intellectually than the writing of it was but you know okay now go to
your to some solo efforts um sun up which was written with a.a jackson so that's
not and billy billy big are set in the same universe obviously few years,
several, maybe centuries apart, I couldn't really tell. Are you going to have
more stories there later in that? No, not at all. What happened was that Al
Jackson, that's essentially Al Jackson's universe, and it's a great one.
Al did all the research, or most of the research, for Sons Up, which I think is
still a really nice story, and it was totally ignored. It came out in the
original anthology, which four people saw. It took eight years for the original
anthology to become a paperback. Nobody saw the paperback, you know. But it was
mostly Al's research, but we had a lot of research left over. So when I started
doing Billy Big Eyes, when I was contracted to do Billy Big Eyes, I said, why
not? I said, you know, at least the communication systems. Well, all I used,
essentially, in the Billy Big Eyes thing was a communication system, And you
assume that since when Al did all this research, it was great. He, like,
covered, like, 30 or 40 years, and, you know, and we only concentrated on, like,
the first five years of the thing, you know, and stuff. There was enough there
for a bunch of stories and stuff. But the communication system I used because it
was, like, exactly what I needed, you know. And I told Al, I said, hey, I'm
going to, you know, write a story and use this stuff. And he said, sure, you
know. And but that's the way that they're the same. it's set in the same
universe in that it's there's a continuity between the two stories and i don't
think i ever mentioned how far apart the events were but i would assume about
100 100 years something like that like you said uh i'm glad that showed of
course nobody ever saw the other story originally when billy big eyes came out
so they wouldn't know you know okay both these were hard science quote so you
like to do one of those every once in a while I did at the time, and I've had
people come up to me and say, you should stick with the other stuff. No,
essentially those are the two. Sun's Up, both were projects, even though it
didn't seem like it. Both were projects of George, products of George
Zebrowski's editorship. Sun's Up, because Al and I wanted to do a story for his
anthology, Faster Than Light. Billy Biggins was originally written to be in
Biogenesis 2, which was the sequel to Tomorrow's—
not Yesterday's Tomorrow's, but it was called Tomorrow Today, right? Tomorrow
Today series from a small publisher in California called Unity Press, which went
out of business after I'd written a story and gotten half the money or something
like that. And George paid me out of his pocket. and it was a theme anthology
from R.W. Ettinger's books.
He did two books, one on Mankind's Future and one on Cryogenics, and Zabrowski
was doing theme anthologies around these two books, and Billy Big Eyes was
originally written for that. But both my things in The Heart Science has been
because George Zabrowski wanted a story from me for a hard science anthology,
and it was a challenge to do it, you know. So I did it. Still, Billy Big Eye's,
although it's hard science, it's a love story, I think. Yeah, the, well, there's
nothing that says that the hard science story can't be a love story or an
adventure story or whatever you want to make it. The thing was that I had to do
it within the framework of some of the extrapolations of Edinger's book. And the
one I chose was heightened senses and heightened awarenesses and, you know,
alteration of bodily shapes and functions and things like that. And I chose the
increase in range of vision, you know, from like x-ray to, you know, infrared
and all that kind of stuff. And use that. but I used it and set it on,
essentially, the story about loss and stuff like that. But the only thing I was
limited by was the research in Ittinger's book because I'm supposed to choose a
certain facet of the book to write a story from. Is that pretty common for
editors to say ok, I want a story and these are the ground rules and you build
your story in that framework? Is that that... that's the only person I've ever
done that for is Zebrowski, both times. And the limit on the first one was it's
got to be a story about faster than light stuff, you know, that's not much of a
limitation, you know, it just means it's got to be set in a faster than light
universe, and ours essentially only used faster than light for the way the thing
got there and the way the thing eventually left. The story was not about any
faster than light drive at all. uh but no most nearly every anthology i've ever
written for has been an original anthology with no theme to it at all they say
the book is open and we're taking stories and i send them a story and they buy
it you know or they don't buy it or whatever but zabrowski's is the only two
theme anthologies that i've ever ever had a story in and uh it's just because he
keeps asking me he kept asking me for stories I'm you know for his anthology and
whatever anthology had open at the time but no it's it used to be a more of
course arnie and very many anthologies at all left anymore there's only one
original anthology left which is Terry Carr's universe and occasionally somebody
will get a theme anthology contract you know they they go to the now you gotta
have supposedly you gotta have a gimmick like and the gimmicks at Asimov and
those people have been using are the weakest gimmicks I've ever heard in my
life, like the future in question with all the story titles in with a question
mark, you know, like who goes there and stuff like that. But, you know, I mean,
it's a gimmick and the publisher says, hey, it's a gimmick, it'll sell, you
know. But like it used to, in the late 60s and early 70s there were a lot of
original anthologies and a lot of theme anthologies, you know, coming out. And
it was common for, it didn't happen to me, but it was common for friends of mine
to get later saying, I want a story about, you know, and I mean, narrow, narrow,
you know, parameters of the story. Like I want a story set in a city where it
used to have a totalitarian government and now it's, you know, now there's a
revolution and what's going to happen to all the water supply. You know, I mean,
people, I know people who wrote stories about stuff like that, that narrow, you
know, and they wrote them and they were good stories besides the fact that they
wrote just a story for that anthology. I mean, if you hadn't known that that was
the, you know, theme behind the anthology, it could have appeared anywhere and
you would have enjoyed it as a story, you know, but, there were lots of those in
the 60s and 70s. A lot of theme anthologies came out. But no more. Okay. Ike at
the mic. All right. I have just about my favorite Walgi story. The only thing I
can say, the only question I can ask here is, gee, where did you get your idea?
Because of the history and the detail and everything. I can tell you exactly
where I got the idea. me and Lee were watching the heroes of rock and roll,
volume two or whatever it was. And they did like a 30 second bit at the end
showing the two heroes of the 50s, which were Elvis Presley and Dwight David
Eisenhower. And it just showed clips from both their lives, you know, right? And
I said, wow, you know, a world where Ike is the musician and Elvis is the
politician, you know? And I tried to give the story to Chad Oliver and Louis
Shiner. They wanted to collaborate at the time. And I tried to give the story to
them. I said, OK, because Chad's a jazz music fan, has been from way back, and
Lou knows everything there is to know about Presley. He wrote a book on Presley
at one time, which hasn't been published yet, I don't think. But he's written
several stories sort of around Presley, and he knows a lot about Presley. I
tried to just give them the idea. I said, look, Ike is a jazz musician. Presley
is a politician. Come on, do the story, send it off, make a lot of money. We
just can't get past the idea of Ike as a musician. They just couldn't do it.
They just couldn't force themselves. Chad is too close to jazz. It's desecrated
like that. And I guess Lou is too close to Presley to, you know, see the
possibilities in, you know, in politics for Presley. But once they wouldn't take
it, I said, well, hell, I'm going to have to write it myself, you know. So I sat
down and wrote it, you know. It's like you – it's just one of those ideas that
bothers you until you write it, you know. I mean, and once I knew I had to write
it, then I'd sit down and I did just enough research on Ike and just enough on
Presley to know about how they would be probably about it and wrote the story
and sent it off. Chad and Lou could have been Richmond. You know, I keep telling
them, you know, it should have been your story when it came out last year. I
said, it should have been your story, should have been your names on it. You
know, but they just couldn't do it. They just had a big stumbling block about
Ike, you know. Did they like it? Oh, yeah. Yeah, they liked it. Yeah, they liked
it well enough. They said they wouldn't have written it like that. And I said,
well, you could have.
But, yeah, it's just one of those. I have story ideas that come to me that
bother me for months and months and months until I finally write them, you know,
until I finally write them. It's the only way I can get rid of them. And Ica to
Mike was one that just, I mean, i don't know where the time where the title i
don't remember exactly when the story became called i get the mic in my mind but
i but i don't remember it at all which means it was probably from the very first
you know the total the title came with the story you know just uh for some
reason and uh that usually doesn't happen either i either get a title first or i
you know get the title after the story's already finished or something, you
know? Okay, the Ugly Chickens and the Nebula Award. Is that your best story, do
you think?
I have not mixed feelings, but I had no idea when I wrote Ugly Chickens how good
it was or not. I hadn't written a story for about six months when I wrote that.
i was doing other stuff and i was working on research on other things and i
hadn't written an actual story so when i finally wrote ugly chickens i didn't
know if it was any good or not i really didn't i couldn't tell anymore i'd
worked on it so long you know i did all this research for this thing like i did
six months of research for it it's way too long for a story and then i wrote the
story and i didn't know if the story was any good or not and then i sent it off
to terry and And like the thing was that Terry at the time was taking a lot of
medicine. He had wrenched his back and he was taking a lot of medicine and
reading for universe at the same time. Universe filled up. And he said, I'd like
to take it, but universe is filled up and all this stuff. And I said, okay. And
about that time, Marta Randall called. He said, hey, I just heard from Terry
about the story and I want it real bad. And will you take twice as much money
for it? And I said, oh, sure, right. So she ran down the hill and got the story
from Terry and sent me a contract, and like two nights later, I walk in the
house, and it's 1230 at night, and the phone rings, and says, Howard, this is
Terry. And I could just see dollars flying out the window. I knew exactly what
was going to happen. And like he had gotten off his medicine, and one of the
stories he had been promised wasn't delivered. and the person says, I can't do
it. He wanted the story back real bad and he was trying politely to get the
story back for less money than Marta was going to pay me and all this kind of
stuff. Anyway, I had no idea at the time whether the story was any good or it
was just Marta and Terry were not functioning at their top flight level. I don't
know, but I always try to hope that the next story I write or one down the line
is going to be going to be my best you know and there's just no you know I like
ugly chickens it still holds up I think real well if that's what you mean I went
back and re-read it about three months ago and it was still a good story which
is all you can hope for because some of them aren't you know or not not they're
not good it's that they're not not like you remembered them or wanted them to be
you know okay um texas or the south or the west or the southwest figure all
figure in a lot of your stories um and it uh which is nice because most of them
are la or new york um is that are you kind of uh being a little regionalist here
trying to get a little pr this is just the natural setting this is this is like
some of the stories like ugly chickens i knew it was going to be set part it was
going to be set in Mississippi from the very first. I knew it was going to end
up in Mississippi. And it was the first story of mine that went back to
Mississippi, Texas-Israeli War, of course, Mary Margaret Road greater, things
like that, those call for a – they had to take place in Texas or a southwestern
setting, you know. And it was just natural, you know. Some of my studies don't
take place much of anywhere, you know, like everybody else's, you know. But it's
not a regional thing. I don't do it on purpose. It's like whatever the story
calls for, you know, for it to happen. You know, like I got the mic. It's not
set anywhere. It's about every, every, everywhere, you know, stuff like that.
Okay. Okay. You have the one novel and a lot of short stories. I know you're
working. I've seen reports that you're working on forthcoming novels, but are
you more comfortable with the short story? Oh, yeah. Yeah. I'm a short story
writer. The only reason I'm writing There are two reasons I'm writing them bones
a novel One is I should have written it I got the idea for it in 1970 Like when
I first started writing And it bothered me for 12 years The idea bothered me for
12 years to write it The other one is that Terry Carr came back Into the field
as a book editor Which is probably going to be the best thing that's happened to
the field In a long time Because he's real good His tastes are I think Superb
And he came back in the field and he said I'm reading for ACSF specials again,
which, you know, that was the line that published Ursula, Left Hand of Darkness,
and, you know, Stand on Zanzibar, and Humanity. I mean, not Humanity Prime, but
all these great books from the late 60s and early 70s were edited by Terry Carr.
He's responsible for them being, you know, on the face of the earth,
essentially. And he came back in the field, and he says, the books are open. I
mean, you know, I've got six books here. And Terry will take it and he won't
monkey with it and it'll appear just like I wrote it. And if Terry says it's,
you know, it's acceptable, it's acceptable, you know. And he's a good editor and
all this kind of stuff, you know, and he's been great. So that's why I'm writing
them bones again, but otherwise I'd just be writing short stories and not making
a living, you know, like everybody else. Do you write full time? Yeah, yeah.
I've been able to write full-time for the last year, year and a half, I think.
Year and a half. For the first time in my life. I tried it once in 1974, being a
full-time writer. And ended up owing all my friends money and starving and
things like that. So I quit and got a part-time job. But I've been doing nothing
but writing since late 80. No, 81, so 81, right. Yeah. Where are you going to go
from here? or just see how it goes. Yeah, yeah, I'm going to finish the book,
and then I've got about, while you're writing a book, you get like 10 or 12
short story ideas that are bothering you, and I had to stop and write one. I had
to stop and write I Get to Mike, you know, working on the book, and I had to
stop and write Man,
Mountain Gentium, which will be out in Omni in August through October or
something like that, and I had to stop and write one, which I finished last
week, to send off to Mike Bishop's Cosmopedia Anthology he's doing and if it
takes another six months on the books which it won't I'll probably write another
story before it's over but otherwise I'll get the book done and then go back to
doing short stories for a while just another short stories for five or six
months Is there any hope that you know we're going to see can there be such a
thing possible as the greatest hits of Howard Waldroup? The problem is nobody's
getting short story collections published right now. They just canceled Sturgeon
Collection, stuff like that. Sturgeon can't get a short story collection
published. I don't have much chance either, you know, but, but hopefully someday
there will be, you know. Right. We're running out of tape.